---
title: Reinforcement Learning for LLMs
description: A brief introduction to reinforcement learning for LLMs
author: datta0
date: 2026-05-21T23:00:00+05:30
categories: [LLM, Fine-tuning, RL, GRPO, PPO, Math]
tags: [LLM, Fine-tuning, RL, GRPO, PPO, Math]
render_with_liquid: false
math: true
image:
  path: /assets/img/blogs/flash_attn_intro/flash_attn_header_preview.jpg
  alt: The magic behind FlashAttention
  no_bg: true
---

## Introduction

LLMs have come a long way in the last few years. We've had LLMs writing poems and short essays to now solving open math research problems. But they started as stochastic parraots right? Regurgitating whatever they have read on the internet without any originality. How did we get them to make such a tremendous leap? Lets find out.

## Supervised fine TUNING

If you have a model that can understand the data at a scale as large as the internet and predict it reliably, then it is safe to assume that it has learnt language and some basic knowledge of the world. Such a model only needs to be shown the ways of being a helpful assistant to be able to respond to our queries in a helpful manner. This is usually what SFT does. You teach the model to respond in certain formats, with certain traits. Typically the initial training on the internet corpus data is referred to as PreTraining. The idea there is to let the model predict the next word and that is what the loss optimises for too. We call the loss Cross Entropy Loss.

$$
\mathcal{L} = -\sum_{i=1}^{N} y_i \log(\hat{y}_i) \quad \text{where } y_i \text{ is the true label and } \hat{y}_i \text{ is the predicted label}
$$

### So what's the problem?
Well the problem is, even with SFT, you're still telling the model exactly what to say. I'd say this is like **Imitation**. And for everything you want to teach the model, you need a explicit examples of what to do in what case. So data gathering is a big requirement as well. High quality datasets at large scale is not easy to come by. Even then you might miss the niche cases, that you didn't have examples for aka the Tail of the distribution (whatever that means). For example, you might have a looot of python code in the dataset but the model might still struggle to write good pytorch code.

## Reinforcement LEARNING

So to teach a kid to play chess, you can tell them to do move XYZ in ABC situation. But that is not going to help them in real games and any deviation from the studied theory, they are vulnerable. Sure they might be able to pattern match and understand a few more scenarios than what you explicitly taught them. But beyond that, the scope for discovering novel and unique strategies is limited. The real learning and improvement happens only when they play the game, do good or bad, know the outcome, correct themselves and do this on repeat. I'd go as far to say that real learning happens at the boundaries of current knowledge and skill. The "play the game" part is taking "actions" on the "environment" of chess board at different points of the game called "states", to "do good or bad" and "win/lose" is the reward. This is pretty much how every reinforcement learning setup is structured.

 - **Agent**: The learner (in our case, the LLM)
 - **Environment**: Where your actions are applied to. For LLMs, it is the task at hand (e.g. coding, math, game play etc.). This can also be a collection of tasks and environments.
 - **State**: The current position on the board (or the current context in the task)
 - **Action**: The move made by the agent (or the response generated by the LLM)
 - **Reward**: The outcome of the action (win/lose or the quality of the response)
 - **Policy**: The strategy the agent uses to make decisions (or the LLM's generation strategy)
 - **Value Function**: The expected return of being in a particular state (or the expected quality of a response). Only depends on the state. Denoted as $V(s)$
 - **Q-Function**: The expected return of taking a particular action in a particular state (or the expected quality of a response given a context). Denoted as $Q(s, a)$

Now that you have the task at hand setup, you need to define the optimization criteria. You want to let the model move towards policies that give higher returns. Because we are doing gradient descent, we would like to formulate a loss that can capture this exact thing. 

$$
\max_{\pi} \mathbb{J}(\pi) = \mathbb{E_{\pi}}[R_t] \\
\text{note that } R_t \text{ can be any function of the observed reward} \\
\text{eg: } R_t = r_t, \\
\text{ or } R_t = \sum_{t'=t}^T r_{t'} \quad \text{sum of all future rewards} \\
\text{ or } R_t = \sum_{t'=t}^T \gamma^{t'-t} r_{t'} \quad \text{discount future rewards}
$$

One thing to notice here is that we only do accumulation of future rewards because we want to evaluate a state. Not the trajectory. Once we have an idea of each state, at inference time we pick the action(s) that land us in better/best states. If we were to include past rewards as well, a good state/action in the past which leads to a loss would be favoured more than a bad state/action which leads to a win. We do not want that.

You can go about achieving this in multiple ways. You can either improve the policy to predict best actions. Or you can fix the policy to be greedy and improve the Q function to predict the expected return for each state-action pair and then choose an action from those that maximize the Q value. Though this approach can lead to small issue.

If a chess agent is only trained on near-optimal sequences of moves, it only ever reaches states that are advantageous and never learns how to handle disadvantageous positions or recover from them, also it might not be able to predict the best move in an amateur game.

One has to remember that any action/state you do not visit, you have no understanding about. So even if its not the most optimal state, you might want to visit them every now and then. You can also explore variants like epsilon greedy where you randomly explore with a small probability the non max reward action. The fine balance between exploration and exploitation is a key challenge in RL. 

Another way to go about this is to improve the policy so that it directly predicts the best action(s). This is often called as Policy Gradient methods as we "improve" or "gradient ascent/descent" on the policy. There need not be any explicit Value function or Q function here. Policy internalises everything.


### REINFORCE
This is pretty much the foundation of modern Reinforcement Learning algorithms and one among the earliest Policy Gradient methods. In the simplest form, the formulation is to maximise sum of all rewards. So the objective is to 
$$
\max_{\pi} \mathbb{J}(\pi) = \mathbb{E_{x \in D, y \sim \pi_{\theta}(.|x)}}[R(x,y)]
$$

Because we perform gradient descent as the optimisation mechanism, we formulate this as a minimisation problem of the negative of the above. 

$$
\min_{\pi} -\mathbb{J}(\pi) = -\mathbb{E_{x \in D, y \sim \pi_{\theta}(.|x)}}[R(x,y)]
$$

But for that to happen, we need to be able to define what the gradient is. The reward is anyway given by the environment and `y` is just sample rollout from the policy. You might think "why not take the derivative of the expectation". You are right in thinking that. Lets look at the math first.

$$
\nabla_{\theta} \mathbb{J}(\pi_{\theta}) = \nabla_{\theta} \mathbb{E_{x \in D, y \sim \pi_{\theta}(.|x)}}[R(x,y)] \\
 = \nabla_{\theta} \mathbb{ \sum_{x \in D} \sum_{i=1}^{n} P_{\pi_{\theta}}(y_i | x_i, \theta) [R(x,y)]} \\
 = \mathbb{ \sum_{x \in D} \sum_{i=1}^{n}  \nabla_{\theta}  P_{\pi_{\theta}}(y_i | x_i, \theta) [R(x,y)]} \\
$$

The problem here is if we choose to take the derivative of the probability distribution, we end up with a complex expression that is hard to compute. We would also lose the ability to represent this as an expectation. The moment we formulate it as expectation, we can use the samples to estimate the gradient. So the question becomes, how do we have the gradient operation while also having a $ \mathbb{P}(y|x)$ in the expression?

#### The log trick
Remember $\frac{d}{dx} \log x = \frac{1}{x} \implies dx = x * d \log x $? Because derivative of log spits out (inverse of) the original function, we can use this to our advantage. So we have 

$$
\nabla \log P_{\pi_{\theta}}(y|x) = \frac{1}{P_{\pi_{\theta}}(y|x)} \nabla P_{\pi_{\theta}}(y|x)
$$

which means 
$$
\nabla P_{\pi_{\theta}}(y|x) = P_{\pi_{\theta}}(y|x) \nabla \log P_{\pi_{\theta}}(y|x)
$$

Substituting this back into our original expression, we get 
$$
\nabla_{\theta} \mathbb{J}(\pi_{\theta}) = \mathbb{ \sum_{x \in D} \sum_{i=1}^{n}  P_{\pi_{\theta}}(y_i | x_i, \theta) \nabla \log P_{\pi_{\theta}}(y_i | x_i, \theta) [R(x,y)]} \\
$$

Now we have probability term inside, multiplied by a function/expression and a summation wrapping the entire thing. The classic `Expectation` formulation almost akin to which we started with. So we can write this as 

$$
\nabla_{\theta} \mathbb{J}(\pi_{\theta}) = \mathbb{E_{x \in D, y \sim \pi_{\theta}(.|x)}}[\nabla \log P_{\pi_{\theta}}(y|x) R(x,y)]
$$
 
All great. But one thing to consider is, if the agent is already in a good state (almost winning chess game), any action would lead to positive reward. So the gradient would be positive for all actions, and the policy would not change. This is not ideal. So what we generally do is subtract a baseline from the reward. This baseline is usually the average reward across all actions like a proxy for how good a state is. This helps in reducing the variance of the gradient estimate. The formulation now becomes... It is very important that the baseline doesn't depend on the rollouts. It can depend on $x$ but not on $\theta$.

$$
\nabla_{\theta} \mathbb{J}(\pi_{\theta}) = \mathbb{E_{x \in D, y \sim \pi_{\theta}(.|x)}}[\nabla \log P_{\pi_{\theta}}(y|x) \cdot (R(x,y) - b(x))]
$$

where $b(x)$ is the baseline.


### PPO
This is the OG of the Reinforcement Learning algorithms. This is pretty much some more mathematical adjustments on top of REINFORCE. The baseline subtracted reward is typically called Advantage here. In the initial days of LLMs, especially GPT 3, there was a need for a way to train the models to be helpful, friendly etc. All the qualities that are easier to judge and harder to quantify mathematically. So one way was to use Reinforcement Learning where helpful and friendly responses would get higher rewards (ofcourse assuming that it is correct). But unlike Pretraining or supervised fine-tuning, this involves generation. Generation of a 1000 new tokens takes 1000 forward passes through the model where as in Pretraining/SFT, 1000 token sample would just be single forward pass. 

So to make it more efficient, we want to be able to do multiple fowrard passes and thus gradient updates on single rollout. Though we have to make sure that the policy (weights) that generated the rollout aren't too far off from the current policy (weights) which we are doing gradient updates on. For first step, this is exact same (ignoring trainer-inference mismatch which is a separate problem). But if we want to do say 4 steps, the policy would have changed by 2nd step and the mismatch needs to be mathematically addressed. 

In case of mismatch, the expectation (which is over generations $y$) is over $ \theta_{old}$ but the logprobs and gradient are computed using $\theta_{new}$. 

#### The importance sampling correction
Consider a probability distribution P for which you want to calculate the expectation over. But you unfortunately do not have access to samples from P. Instead you can sample from another distribution Q over the same input space. How would one calculate that?

$$
\mathbb{E}_P[f(x)] = \sum_x P(x) f(x) = \sum_x \frac{P(x)}{Q(x)} Q(x) f(x) = \mathbb{E}_Q\left[\frac{P(x)}{Q(x)} f(x)\right]
$$

So here we converted an expectation over P to an expectation over Q by reweighting the samples with the ratio $\frac{P(x)}{Q(x)}$. This is exactly what we're about to do to the PPO case as well. Q is fixed distribution where we generate rollouts from. P is the distribution we're optimising and gradient updating on.

$$
\nabla \mathbb{J}(\theta) = \mathbb{E}_{x \sim \mathcal{D}, y \sim \pi_\theta(\cdot|x)}\left[\nabla \log \pi_\theta(y|x) \cdot A^\pi(x, y)\right] \\
 = \mathbb{E}_{x \sim \mathcal{D}, y \sim \pi_\theta(\cdot|x)}\left[\frac{\pi_\theta(y|x)}{\pi_{\theta_{old}}(y|x)} \cdot \nabla \log \pi_\theta(y|x) \cdot A^\pi(x, y)\right]
$$

#### The trust region

One other thing when it comes to RL is, unlike SFT which is very forgiving for the choice of the setup, RL is very very finnicky. Small changes in the setup can cause drastic differences. The range is as wide as learning vs collapsing. So we need to be careful. There can be some rogue data samples or rollouts which can spoil the whole training process. Also we need to make sure noise in the environment or reward or rollouts does not mess it up. So we want to make sure the updates are "capped" so that consistent changes in similar direction will result in learning but random changes won't and noise doesn't have too much impact. This is where "Trust Region" comes in. Because the update has an importance sampling factor, which is a very good measure of how far the new policy is from the old policy, we try to clamp it to achieve that. 

$$
A^{\pi}(x,y) = R(x,y) - b(x) \quad \quad \text{(Advantage function)} \\
\rho(\theta) = \frac{\pi_\theta(y|x)}{\pi_{\theta_{old}}(y|x)} \quad \quad \text{(Importance sampling ratio)} \\
\mathbb{J}(\theta) = \mathbb{E}_{x \sim \mathcal{D}, y \sim \pi_\theta(\cdot|x)}\left[\min(\rho(\theta) A^\pi(x, y), \text{ clip}(\rho(\theta), 1-\epsilon, 1+\epsilon) A^\pi(x, y))\right]
$$

Note that the advantage can be both negative and positive for a given batch. So we want to look into how the trust region clipping works in both the cases. Assuming the usual $\epsilon = 0.2$, we have...

The clipping handles four scenarios:

| | Not clipped | Clipped |
|---|---|---|
| **Positive advantage** (good answer, reinforce) | $\rho_t(\theta)\hat{A}_t$: the answer is good and has not been over-updated | $(1 + \epsilon)\hat{A}_t$: the answer is already sufficiently more likely, so the gradient is stopped |
| **Negative advantage** (bad answer, discourage) | $\rho_t(\theta)\hat{A}_t$: the answer is bad and has not been over-updated | $(1 - \epsilon)\hat{A}_t$: the answer is already sufficiently less likely, so the gradient is stopped |

This can be expressed as a mask:
$$
M(\hat{A}_t, \rho_t, \epsilon) =
\begin{cases}
0 & \text{if } (\hat{A}_t > 0 \land \rho_t > 1 + \epsilon) \lor (\hat{A}_t < 0 \land \rho_t < 1 - \epsilon) \\
1 & \text{otherwise}
\end{cases}
\\

\text{so the entire equation boils down to}: \mathbb{J}(\theta) = \mathbb{E}_{x \sim \mathcal{D}, y \sim \pi_\theta(\cdot|x)}\left[M(\hat{A}_t, \rho_t, \epsilon) \cdot \rho(\theta) A^\pi(x, y)\right]
$$

Do note that when the mask is zero, the gradient too is zero. So for learning to happen, we need the samples to just be hard enough that it is reachable for the model but not too big or not too small. 

#### The KL divergence penalty
All is great so far. We formulated REINFORCE with baseline subtraction for reduced variance, added importance sampling to relieve rollout pressure and added trust region to ensure updates are not too big. But one other anchor still remains. The SFT-ed model we created already has a lot of capabilities and preferences baked into it. We do not want to stray too far from it. So we add a KL divergence penalty wrt to the same SFT model often called as the `reference model` to the loss function so that we don't drift too far off from it either.

So the final loss function becomes:

$$
\mathbb{J}(\theta) = \mathbb{E}_{x \sim \mathcal{D}, y \sim \pi_\theta(\cdot|x)}\left[M(\hat{A}_t, \rho_t, \epsilon) \cdot \rho(\theta) A^\pi(x, y) - \beta \cdot \text{KL}(\pi_\theta(\cdot|x) \| \pi_{\text{ref}}(\cdot|x))\right]
$$

where $\beta$ is the KL divergence penalty coefficient, typically small enough that KL divergence doesn't overpower environment reward but large enough to prevent catastrophic forgetting. So even while maxxing out on math and code, your model doesn't forget the art, language, knowledge and chat-assistant capabilities it had before. 

